[Outlook] (smart alerts) Add scenarios and limitations sections (#3448)
OfficeDev/office-js-docs-pr: docs/outlook/smart-alerts-onmessagesend-walkthrough.md

---
title: Use Smart Alerts and the OnMessageSend and OnAppointmentSend events in your Outlook add-in (preview)

> description: Learn how to handle the send message and appointment events in your Outlook add-in using event-based activation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to handle the on-send events in your Outlook add-in using event-based activation.
```

1. In Outlook on Windows, create a new message and set the subject. In the body, add text like "Hey, check out this picture of my dog!".
1. Send the message. A dialog should pop up with a recommendation for you to add an attachment.

>     ![Dialog recommending the user to include an attachment.](../images/outlook-win-smart-alert.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ![Screenshot of a dialog recommending that the user include an attachment.](../images/outlook-win-smart-alert.png)
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I believe accessibility guides advise to avoid using 'Screenshot of..." or "Image of..." in alt text.

1. Add an attachment then send the message again. There should be no alert this time.

## Smart Alerts feature behavior and scenarios

Descriptions of the **SendMode** options and recommendations for when to use them are detailed in [Available SendMode options](/javascript/api/manifest/launchevent). The following describes the feature's behavior for certain scenarios.

### Add-in is unavailable

If the add-in is unavailable when a message or appointment is being sent (for example, an error occurs that prevents the add-in from loading), the user is alerted. The options available to the user differ depending on the **SendMode** option applied to the add-in.

If the `PromptUser` or `SoftBlock` option is used, the user can choose **Send Anyway** to send the item without the add-in checking it, or **Try Later** to let the item be checked by the add-in when it becomes available again.

> ![Dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is unavailable and gives the user the option to send the item now or later.](../images/outlook-soft-block-promptUser-unavailable.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Sreenshot of dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is unavailable and gives the user the option to send the item now or later.](../images/outlook-soft-block-promptUser-unavailable.png)
```

If the `Block` option is used, the user can't send the item until the add-in becomes available.

> ![Dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is unavailable. The user can only send the item when the add-in is available again.](../images/outlook-hard-block-unavailable.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is unavailable. The user can only send the item when the add-in is available again.](../images/outlook-hard-block-unavailable.png)
```

### Long-running add-in operations

> If the add-in runs for more than five seconds (but less than five minutes), the user is alerted that the add-in is taking longer than expected to process the message or appointment.

Reviewer: I don't think the parentheses are needed.
```suggestion
If the add-in runs for more than five seconds but less than five minutes, the user is alerted that the add-in is taking longer than expected to process the message or appointment.
```

If the `PromptUser` option is used, the user can choose **Send Anyway** to send the item without the add-in completing its check. Alternatively, the user can select **Don't Send** to stop the add-in from processing.

> ![Dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is taking longer to process the item. The user can choose to send the item without the add-in completing its check or stop the add-in from processing the item.](../images/outlook-promptUser-long-running.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is taking longer than expected to process the item. The user can choose to send the item without the add-in completing its check or stop the add-in from processing the item.](../images/outlook-promptUser-long-running.png)
```

However, if the `SoftBlock` or `Block` option is used, the user will not be able to send the item until the add-in completes processing it.

> ![Dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is taking longer to process the item. The user must wait until the add-in completes processing the item before it can be sent.](../images/outlook-soft-hard-block-long-running.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of dialog that alerts the user that the add-in is taking longer than expected to process the item. The user must wait until the add-in completes processing the item before it can be sent.](../images/outlook-soft-hard-block-long-running.png)
```

> `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend` add-ins should be short-running and lightweight. To avoid the long-running operation dialog, use other events to pre-process conditional checks before the `OnMessageSend` or `OnAppointmentSend` event is activated. For example, if the user is required to encrypt attachments for every message or appointment, consider using the `OnMessageAttachmentsChanged` or `OnAppointmentAttachmentsChanged` event to perform the check.

Reviewer: I don't know that we should say "pre" (of pre-process) and "before" since they mean essentially the same
```suggestion
`OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend` add-ins should be short-running and lightweight. To avoid the long-running operation dialog, use other events to process conditional checks before the `OnMessageSend` or `OnAppointmentSend` event is activated. For example, if the user is required to encrypt attachments for every message or appointment, consider using the `OnMessageAttachmentsChanged` or `OnAppointmentAttachmentsChanged` event to perform the check.
```

### Add-in timed out

If the add-in runs for five minutes or more, it will time out. If the `PromptUser` option is used, the user can choose **Send Anyway** to send the item without the add-in completing its check. Alternatively, the user can choose **Don't Send**.

> ![Dialog that alerts the user that the add-in process has timed out. The user can choose to send the item, without the add-in completing its check, or not send the item.](../images/outlook-promptUser-timeout.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of dialog that alerts the user that the add-in process has timed out. The user can choose to send the item without the add-in completing its check, or not send the item.](../images/outlook-promptUser-timeout.png)
```

If the `SoftBlock` or `Block` option is  used, the user can't send the item until the add-in completes its check. The user must attempt to send the item again to reactivate the add-in.

> ![Dialog that alerts the user that the add-in process has timed out. The user must attempt to send the item again to activate the add-in before they can send the message or appointment.](../images/outlook-soft-hard-block-timeout.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot of dialog that alerts the user that the add-in process has timed out. The user must attempt to send the item again to activate the add-in before they can send the message or appointment.](../images/outlook-soft-hard-block-timeout.png)
```

## Limitations

Because the `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend` events are supported through the event-based activation feature, the same feature limitations apply to add-ins that activate as a result of these events. For a description of these limitations, refer to [Event-based activation behavior and limitations](autolaunch.md#event-based-activation-behavior-and-limitations).

In addition to these constraints, only one instance each of the `OnMessageSend` and `OnAppointmentSend` event can be declared in the manifest. If you require multiple `OnMessageSend` or `OnAppointmentSend` events, you must declare each one in a separate manifest or add-in.

While a Smart Alerts dialog message can be changed to suit your add-in scenario using the [errorMessage property](/javascript/api/office/office.addincommands.eventcompletedoptions) of the event.completed method, the following can't be customized.

- The dialog's title bar. Your add-in's name is always displayed there.
- The message's format. For example, you can't change the text's font size and color or insert a bulleted list.

> - The dialog options. For example, the **Send Anyway** and **Don't Send** options are fixed and are dependent on the [SendMode option](/javascript/api/manifest/launchevent) you select.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The dialog options. For example, the **Send Anyway** and **Don't Send** options are fixed and depend on the [SendMode option](/javascript/api/manifest/launchevent) you select.
```
